---
title: Defining my new remote praxis
template: blog
published: true
---

Warning: This post is a bit of a brain dump. I haven't blogged in so long that you're going to see the thoughts fall into place and form connections as I type.

After leaving Webflow in May, amid COVID-19 shutdowns, I have been exploring independent work. I described it to everyone I met as "living my life as a creative studio". The "studio" part is significant. It's based on my time in design school, where a shared studio space created many chances for each of us to walk by other desks, ask what they were doing, and open up new collaboration and idea exchange opportunities.

This feeling of working together, while not always working on the same thing, is something I really cherish. To some extent, I experienced it after graduation at Facebook, where the company was so large and projects so numerous, that you could have this type of interaction so long as you were situtated at headquarters in the first half of the 2010s. You didn't even have to try, and you would come across this type of experience.

Now that I'm based in Dallas, working independently, far away from other people who share my interests, this requires more of an intentional approach. I have to make it clear that I want this type of relationship, and set up the infrastructure to make remote work conducive to these types of spontaneous events.

This primarily making myself available online, constantly, through all forms of communication. Twitter, Discord, Slack... by being online I am trying to maxmize for this mimicry of the IRL desk-swing-by-chat. Has it been successful? At times, although the tolerance for asynchronous chat is much higher than I previously expected, but only for people I already have a close relationship with. Building it anew is quite hard and requires defining a lot of new practices. It means publicly sharing what's on my mind, and actively setting up time with new folks to create those new relationships.

Thus far, the focus has been on building that muscle of remote collaboration. But there are a lot of layers of thoughts I want to rebuild in this new remote praxis. Particularly, one of ethical design.

Recently I [tweeted for interest on a new design tool](https://twitter.com/tarngerine/status/1297924388034158592) I'm working on with my friend Zack Schiller. Most of the responses were from cis white men or east/south asian men. Basically a mirror of general tech representation. However, I noticed a lot of non-cis-white-men had liked the tweet, so I decided to reach out over DMs. Those conversations that followed have been much more helpful, as Zack and I think not only about the tool, but about the way in which we plan to build it. I'Ll write more about this later on the actual tool's blog, but some questions we asked (which will probably never be fully answered):

- How do we do "open source" inclusively? Is it possible with the existing model or do we have to create something new?
- How do we provoke new framing and thinking around what constitutes a design tool? How is the modern framing around a design tool skewed by euro-centric thinking?
- How do we create a sustainable model of participatory building and financial independence?

It reminds me of a lot of my prior reading on the ethics of technology — a topic I read and thought about a lot while at Facebook, post-2016. Having spent the past few months pouring concrete in the slab foundation for my independent practice (albeit sloppily), it now feels appropriate to reengage more with the topic of how I can work in a way consistent with my morals.

I wanted to share a few recent examples of me choosing to work differently than I might have before. I recognize that I am able to do this because of my privilege (network, finance), but I want to be able to have broader impact by sharing my thought process. I also recognize that they might actually come across this blog post (Hi!) and may want to cut ties with me if they recognize themselves. However, this is important to write for me, as a reminder to myself to live by my values. I've tried to obscure a lot of details — unless you know me personally you probably won't know the identities of these two companies.

I turned down a contract from an extremely well-funded seed stage startup. It was for an interesting R&D project, but they offered a rate well below industry average (1/3 of what I usually chage). My decision wasn't actually based on "I'm worth more than this" — I was actually leaning towards doing the project because the R&D aspect was really intriguing, and the idea was something I've always wanted to do. Instead, I had been talking with my partner, who brought up the impact of a senior person like myself taking a substandard rate — what that would do to other folks with less privilege who wanted to do a similar type of work. By participating in this low rate, I'd be setting a ceiling to the rates of other people. In fact, this already happened — the rate they offered me was based on an existing contractor who is based in Eastern Europe, where the cost of living is much lower than in the US, and 2 other folks who accepeted similar rates.

I also turned down a part-time employee role from a startup working to empower underrepresented folks in tech. As it was an employment offer (not a contract), I needed to be sure we were aligned philosophically on the approach towards increasing representation. After a conversation or two, it was clear we were not, and even upon pressing for them to take specific actions, the common response was a deflection, like "we aren't there yet as a company" or "that's a separate conversation". I could choose to help them, even though we weren't fully aligned, and invest the emotional energy into educating the founders. But it didn't feel worth it to me. I'd have to compromise a lot with people who clearly didn't see eye to eye, and empower an institution with a likelihood of continuing to do many things that I found morally distasteful.

I now find myself at the cusp of a new way to work. I've been working pro-bono for MakeSpace Foundation (recently 501(c)(3) incorporated), and working on the design tool I mentioned above (exploring a hybrid of open source, inclusive community building, and [the co-op model](https://zebrasunite.coop/)). I've been turning down projects that don't fully align with my personal goals or my ethics.

I'm very excited, yet at the same time, I'm very scared. I've been dealing with a gut-clenching, hard-to-breathe physical reaction constantly for 3 weeks. My therapist's current theory is that it's due to this new praxis — something I've never really done before. I constantly feel it, from doing mundane things like brushing my teeth, to thinking existentially while walking our dogs. I've tried to just feel the feeling, but even after a grief-like meditation on the sensation yesterday, I come up empty. Maybe the emptiness is because of this unanchoring. I've been climbing ladders for so long. From school, thru typical company employment... all the focus on someone else defining "what's good", and me aiming for that.

Now that I'm independent, it's up to me to define "what's good". That's probably terrifying, because I find myself often with nothing new or unique to say. I'm great at reacting to things, but original thought — that's difficult! I hope to build that in the writing of this blog here.

I think that's probably a good stopping point for now. This was a nice experience to write, although the clenching sensation is back. 

I'll leave you with some insights from a paper I read this morning: [A Brief Introduction to Decolonial Computing, by Syed Mustafa Ali](https://www.are.na/block/8613856). It's mostly based on colonialism in the European context.

- Computing is based on modernity, which itself is based in colonialism. It is necessarily colonial in its nature.
- Universal concepts like ubiquitous computing are developed with the idea that you can erase race, religion, by folks who recognize racism as a problem, yet have a ham-fisted approach to naively design things by ignoring race ("I don't see color!"). The idea of de-racing usually ends up with something that looks quite White — like how Swiss design self-proclaimed itself as the International Style. Without much questioning, it becomes the new norm, and in many ways is just colonialism with a coat of paint that distracts from its true essence. It's like a so-called "Flat" organization that actually is very much hierarchical, but the power dynamics are rendered invisible and undefined, rather than explicit, often with worse results.
- "Postcolonial" discourse follows a similar vein, where the name itself implies that colonialism is over, when it is far from not.
- Somehow we must figure out a way to build computing *with* those who are systematicalyl excluded. (Personally, this is something I care about a lot and yet am very unsure how to do it, see: the design tool)